---
layout: default
---

[Home](./) | [Projects](./projects) | [Code Review](https://snhu-my.sharepoint.com/:v:/g/personal/jacob_senior_snhu_edu/ES4U-5IozbhLmY7yaBhKva4BPKd-zv4oNN2zMp3OWLBOZQ?nav=eyJyZWZlcnJhbEluZm8iOnsicmVmZXJyYWxBcHAiOiJPbmVEcml2ZUZvckJ1c2luZXNzIiwicmVmZXJyYWxBcHBQbGF0Zm9ybSI6IldlYiIsInJlZmVycmFsTW9kZSI6InZpZXciLCJyZWZlcnJhbFZpZXciOiJNeUZpbGVzTGlua0NvcHkifX0&e=bVf24h)

# Professional Self-Assessment

Throughout my education in the field of computer science, I have attained a problem-solving mindset and cognizance of programming principles and standards in addition to numerous technical skills. Prior to engaging in my studies as a computer scientist, I understood an education in computer science to be more concerned with building technical skills than developing a programming mindset. While technical skills are essential for being able to develop quality software, the essence of a quality computer scientist is their approach to designing and developing this software. In developing this mindset, I learned to design and develop quality software that incorporates industry programming standards and values scalability and maintainability. In addition to this mindset, I have learned the importance of communication with team members and stakeholders. 

Being able to collaborate in a team environment is an essential skill for a computer scientist to have as working with a team can enhance the quality and efficiency of a project. From a technical standpoint, I have learned how to use version control software such as GitHub to develop software with a team. More importantly, I have learned how to effectively communicate in a team setting. Communication is the most important aspect of working in a team as it aligns the team’s understanding of current goals and obstacles throughout the project. Quality communication necessitates openness and transparency from team members. Open and transparent communication requires communicating both good and bad updates to all relevant members of the team as frequently as possible. Having worked on multiple team projects throughout my education I feel confident in my skills to effectively communicate in team settings. 

Another crucial communication skill for software engineers is effectively communicating with stakeholders. I have learned how essential this step of developing any software is as inadequate communication with stakeholders can result in massive damage to the project’s development. It is important to understand how to interact with stakeholders as clearly understanding a project's requirements is crucial to its success. Further, communication with stakeholders should be valued throughout and project’s development as challenges with meeting requirements can be resolved as early as possible. Understanding how to effectively communicate with stakeholders will prevent development delays and unnecessary costs. 

Along with these collaboration skills, I have also learned many technical skills in the field of computer science. These skills can be summarized into the following categories: data structures and algorithms, software engineering and databases, and security. I have further demonstrated my skills in each of these areas by adding an enhancement to a previous project considering each of these categories. More information about these projects can be found on the “Projects” page. 

Early on in the computer science program, I was introduced to algorithms and data structures. These concepts serve as the foundation of building solutions to intricate and efficient systems. By understanding how to use complex algorithms and data structures I have built a technical repertoire that can optimize and solve a wider variety of problems. My enhancement in the algorithms and data structures project illustrates my ability to add rich functionality and optimize software using algorithms and data structures. 

The skills I have developed in the area of software engineering are concerned with the design and development process of a project. This is a large array of skills that include understanding development methodologies, such as Agile and Scrum, how to design intricate systems using design patterns and principles, the importance of maintainable software, iterative and incremental development processes, and commonly used frameworks such as the MEAN stack. The enhancement I added to the software engineering project recreates a Python project in Java using a MEAN stack and RESTful API. 

I have notably also gained a skillset working with both SQL and NoSQL databases. This is a powerful skill for any developer as databases are essential to most modern software solutions. Database integration can often lead to improved functionality or a better user experience in software applications. For my database enhancement project, I built off the software engineering enhancement, adding the ability to update and delete entries in the database using the web applications. 

Finally, I have gained a security mindset and an array of security skills that can be used to improve the security of my software. A security mindset is not separate from but rather is interwoven with my programming mindset. The security aspect adds another layer to how I approach solving problems and designing and developing software. With a security mindset, I consider how vulnerabilities might be introduced to a system and anticipate ways of exposing and addressing vulnerabilities throughout development. My security enhancement builds on the database enhancement, requiring the user to be authenticated before performing operations on the database. 

Computer science has honed my desire and ability to learn new technical skills and grow my standards and expectations for myself. It serves as my creative outlet, enabling me to create software that I enjoy and am proud of. I believe the skills I have highlighted and my passion for this field aptly demonstrate my value as a computer scientist. 
